US Secretary of State Anthony blinkin
has said that a ceasefire that the US is
working on would be the best way to
ensure humanitarian assistance gets to
Palestinians in Gaza blinkin who was in
Egypt for talks on Thursday said Israel
needs to do more to help increase the
flow of Aid he signaled some hope saying
that he still believes that a ceasefire
agreement is possible bin says that the
gaps are narrowing between Israel and
tamas over the deal here's what bin said
after meeting with Arab forward
ministers over the past several weeks
there's a clear consensus around a
number of shared priorities first the
need for an immediate sustained
ceasefire with the release of hostages
uh that would create space to Surge more
humanitarian assistance to
relieve uh the suffering of many people
and to build something more
enduring now the ceasefire that we're
working on would be the best most
immediate way to enable us to Surge
humanitarian assistance but it's not the
only way uh we agreed today all of the
ministers that we would get our experts
together in the coming days uh to
identify the Urgent practical and
conrete steps that Canen and should be
taken to increase the flow of
assistance for the US Secretary of State
in Cairo today for this latest round of
ceasefire negotiations how much success
did he have I want to talk about that
with journalist kareim alahar who is in
Cairo kareim it's good to see you again
we just heard linoln um talking there
how much how closer or how far apart are
we today to an immediate sustainable
ceasefire well he said basically that is
the main Way Forward he said also that
they're getting closer but also
admitting that there are still a lot of
difficulties ahead I think one of the
best indications that there is something
on the table that's worth negotiating is
the fact that tomorrow uh there will be
a big meeting in Doha in Qatar also with
the head of the Israeli mad intelligence
service so there seems to be enough to
continue the negotiations and the blink
seems to be quite optimistic that it
will move forward Blan also said that
Israel needs to do more W with Aid
deliveries to Gaza it seems that the US
is now I don't want to say on a full
confrontation course with Netanyahu but
it it could be described that way um and
that pressure is building up what would
you say is behind this
strategy well he clearly said that there
is more Aid coming in in the last days
but he said it's by far not enough and
uh of course that is a clear call
towards the Israeli sides to finally
open their borders to really get in
massive amounts of AIDS I think what is
uh behind it is is really that uh we
just heard it some days ago from the
world food program that is warning of an
imminent famine in the Gaza Strip and
imminent famine is like there's certain
indicators the great of malnutrition
among children for example how many
children food security food insecurity
of the Gaza Strip which blinkin also
said in the press conference is for 100%
of the people in the Gaza Strip so I
think the US doesn't want to be
complicit any longer into the situation
and why that's why they're pressuring
for more Aid to coming in and it's an
indication also that the negotiations
when blinkin comes to Israel tomorrow
will be quite tough if he wants to move
forward on this yeah how much leverage
do you think the US has right now in um
trying to you know push Israel in a
certain direction we know that Netanyahu
have said that there is no alternative
to a ground assault in Rafa
well that's a question uh I mean tough
tough talk tomorrow in Israel probably
will be not enough it's a question I
mean there's clear words now or more
clear words by the US side that there
needs to be more Aid coming in that we
need to have a
ceasefire uh the question is what's what
how is the US acting on this talks and I
mean we have at the same time we have
all this talk but at the same time of of
course the biggest military assistance
for netan in this Gaza War comes from
the US so there's a lot of Leverage the
US has which he didn't use yet and we
are hearing from the office of Benjamin
Netanyahu that on Friday Israel's spy
Chief David Baria will travel to Qatar
to secure a Gaza ceasefire that would
include a hostage release when you hear
that Kareem would you say that this
indicates that things are moving that
that we are looking at possible
progress yes absolutely but because we
don't know the details but we know also
what the sticking points are I think the
main sticking point is basically there's
an agreement that for six weeks ceas
fire and for the release of 40 Israeli
hostages in exchange for the 20 to 30
fold number of Palestinians from being
to be released from Israeli prisons but
there's a lot of sticking points then
then there think the main sticking point
is that Hamas is saying we're going to
continue to release hostages in a second
phase and that means also the soldiers
but we want to have guarantees for a
permanent ceasefire and for an end of
this war and that is something of course
very difficult to stomach for Netanyahu
because his uh announced objective in
this war is the destruction of Hamas
which he would have not achieved in this
case journalist kareim Al gari from
Cairo tonight with the latest Kareem
thank
you you're welcome well I'm joined Now
by Israeli foreign and security policy
expert Gil morciano he's the CEO of the
israel-based think tank mfim he joins me
tonight from Tel Aviv it's good to have
you with us um this is the very first
time that the United States is calling
for an immediate ceasefire this is a
major shift how is the Israeli
government likely to view this
well I mean I think that we are focusing
on this specific step as a pressure tool
on the Israeli government but I think
that when we speak about the blinken
call that was issued in the in the Saudi
media interview we are mainly speaking
about the attempt or a diplomatic action
by the US to preserve the initiative in
the UN Council amid reports that Russia
is planning to offer new new forms or
new calls trying to keep their
initiative instead of Ving avoiding a
veto on that level but I also think in
the timing and place and the context of
the visit it's also a show of resolve by
the US government to show strategic
partners that the American goals are
aligned with a strategic Vision or an
attempt to desg or to outline a vision
for the day after especially lacking
such effort from the Israeli government
yeah so you say the United States trying
to create clarity about where it stands
we're getting Clarity also from Benjamin
Netanyahu he argues that there is no
alternative plan than to continue the
attack on Rafa to ultimately defeat
Hamas do you agree with
that well I think that it's a question
of what we Define how do we Define the
goal of defeating Hamas if we are
talking about a military action that is
meant to reduce its military power in
Gaza I think that was achieved in the
last five months um but there's also
limits to the military action basically
if we speak about marginal marginalizing
Hamas movement then defeating Hamas is
not just a military action it's mostly
and mainly a political maneuver and
that's something that Nan is not willing
to discuss right now from obvious
political obstacles in his government
any kind of plans for a day after a
political day after and that obviously
leaves major vacuums for Hamas to
actually re-enter one of the main
example that we see right now and you
mention it the issue of humanitarian Aid
uh in the last couple of months we've
seen the expansion of a military of a
human Aid into Gaza but lacking any
alternative any attempt to build an
administrative control that would
replace Hamas by the Israel government
uh we see how Hamas actually take over
this humanitarian Aid and sell it to the
citizens and basically preserve its deao
power on the ground I want to stick with
Netanyahu for just a moment in in your
opinion how much pressure can the US
exert on Netanyahu at this
point I think we're already seeing a
change in in American policy not so much
regarding the support of Israel when it
comes to supplying arms but have you
we've seen a clear separation between um
protecting or maintaining the right of
Defense of Israeli citizens and their
aversion I would even say from the
policies of this Israeli government
especially the right-wing the extreme
rightwing ashon within it um so I think
that when we are closing in on the
election we are talking about a certain
L of support among young the young
generation of the democratic party in
swing states such as Michigan um then
there's also the domestic calculation I
think that we still see a consistency in
American in American policy towards the
war but when we speak about the
expansion of the war especially about
Rafa which is currently the major policy
issue and expansion of Israeli military
operation into Rafa then we're going to
see those gaps becoming more and more
apparent and without an Israel ability
to show any new initiative the the gaps
are going to become much more meaningful
in the relations between the countries
yeah you you say what we're hearing from
the US has to do with politics this is a
an election year if we were to take that
out of the equation if if Joe Biden were
not fighting for reelection this coming
November do you think we would be seeing
the United States right now calling for
an immediate
ceasefire I think it's just one factor
but I think the major issue I mean we
can speak about disagreement between
Israel in the US regarding braf or about
the humanitarian Aid I think the major
issue here regardless of domestic
consideration is whether or not Israel
is planning or even willing to discuss
an exit strategy I mean the uh
acceptance or the understanding that the
US has shown before to the war goals to
the understanding that Hamas could not
continue governing Gaza to regaining the
security situation or to allowing
Israelis all those things that we've
seen at the start were based on the
commitment of an Israel government to
actually speak about the day after to
offer initiative to speak about the
return of the PE of the Palestinian
Authority uh to speak about a an
alternative for Kamas that would be
viable and would allow the US instead of
being stuck in an ongoing War to
actually promote a new political order
together with region electors and that's
why coming back to your origional point
this meeting between region electors and
between blink is about that about
signifying the need to deal with a
certain Vision something that we have
not from this Israel government I want
to emphasize it's not about the lack of
a ability to present a plan that the US
accept it is the unwillingness to
discuss any kind of plan or any kind of
exit strategy at this moment okay yeah
that's right the day after still the big
question Gil Marciano Israeli foreign
and security policy expert Gil we
appreciate your time and your analysis
tonight thank
you thank you very
much European leaders meanwhile have
been meeting in Brussels today where Gaz
is humanitarian crisis is on the agenda
alongside Ukraine and plans to develop
Europe's defense capabilities now EU
leaders will also consider proposals to
buy armaments for Ukraine using the
proceeds of Frozen Russian assets and
whether to open membership talks with
Bosnia Hova un Secretary General Antonio
gutieres arrived at the start of the
two-day EU Summit to encourage more
relief for gazans the UN says a quarter
of gaza's population is
starving
well the European Union's foreign policy
Chief Joseph Burell has described the
situation in Gaza as being not a
humanitarian crisis but rather a failure
of humanity he says the EU leaders
meeting in Brussels who collectively
form the European Council will be
calling for the release of Israeli
hostages as well as a ceasefire that
will hold today the council goes much
further supporting
unra asking for a sustainable CE fire
certainly asking also for the freedom of
hostages needless to say condemning
Mam's attack but showing an strong
concern for the situation of the people
in Gaza which is
unacceptable toally Israel has the right
to defend not to
Revenge not to Revenge defend all right
I want to pull in our correspondent Jack
perck now he's following the summit for
us in Brussels Jack is Joseph barell as
he's speaking for all all EU heads of
government when he calls for a
sustainable
ceasefire well that is exactly what
we're looking to see throughout the
process of this Summit whether the EU
leaders will agree for that progression
the last time we had any of the European
union leaders agreeing on some sort of
call for a change in the situation of
Israel's military uh campaign in the
Gaza Strip against the Hamas Terror
organization they called for
humanitarian pauses to allow Aid in our
DW team here in Brussels has been
covering and listening to a lot of the
briefings from a lot of the different EU
member states over the last few days and
going into this Summit we understand
that the language coming out will say
that the EU will call for immediate
humanitarian pauses leading to a
sustainable ceasefire five or six months
ago the idea of calling for a ceasefire
was an absolute nogo for the EU leaders
especially Germany which didn't feel
they could call for that but we do
understand that as this Summit
progresses the EU leaders will be able
to call for that sustainable ceasefire
that that language will get into the
document that comes out after this
Summit Jack leaders are also talking
about using Frozen Russian assets to
boost Aid to Ukraine are we going to see
that
happen that's a trickier one to get an
agreement on frankly this is a really
interesting concept uh about the Russian
Central Bank has about 210 billion EUR
in a a financial mechanism which has
been ACR interest over the last couple
of years since the fullscale invasion
and since Russia's assets Financial
Assets in Europe were frozen around
three billion has been uh raised as part
of that now the German Chancellor Olaf
Schultz on his way into this Summit said
there's a growing majority here in the
European Council of all the 27 leaders
that suggests that that money could be
used to start buying uh ammunition and
weapons by the Europeans themselves that
then could be sent to the ukrainians now
KL nmer however the Austrian Chancellor
he's saying actually no that what they
understood their agreement was was that
it would be for the Reconstruction of
Ukraine so it appears to be some
disputes within the European Council we
can see that Olaf Schultz during these
meetings he's trying to get the other
leaders on side whether he manages to do
so it might be a long shot but this is
now on a table how does the European
Union use these Frozen Russian assets we
know that Russia's fullscale invasion of
Ukraine has prompted a lot of talk about
boosting Europe's defenses is there
agreement on how this will
happen now this is an even more
complicated again issue this idea that's
being floated of Defense bonds after the
corona V virus pandemic what we saw is
the European Union started using the
European commission the executive body
it's a bit technical but it has a AAA r
rating it has the best rating to borrow
money on the international markets and
it used that rating to borrow money to
get out of the covid-19 pandemic and
then it's used it for green uh to help
with the green transition and now there
are some countries which are starting to
say it should be used to gain money for
the European Union to proect protect its
defense a lot of leaders including the
German Chancellor said okay nice idea
but I don't think that we'll see any
clear agreement on that during this
Summit but it is significant Brent that
they're talking about this now okay Jack
perck for us in Brussels Jack as always
thank
you